Bmeduri/elyra (#2)
RedHatQuickCourses/rhods-pipelines: modules/chapter3/pages/section1.adoc

= Section 1

> == AI Pipelines

Reviewer: This is a nice introductory overview of pipelines and Elyra, which is best placed in chapter 1, the theoretical background (see [design doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nIfEaLDELWMC24Q9GlS19hQIQba-bOmhAiIjomsyU8Y/edit#heading=h.dfpktd2cs6qg)).

Please coordinate with @codrinbucur to move the introductory sub sections to chapter 1.

> Constructing an AI pipeline for a model presents significant challenges, yet segmenting and modularizing this pipeline is even more complex. A standard machine or deep learning pipeline usually starts with a sequence of preprocessing activities, then progresses through a phase of experimentation and optimization and finally does the deployment. Each stage poses distinct obstacles throughout the model development process.

Reviewer 2: We could also explicitly mention that a pipeline does model training

```suggestion
Constructing an AI pipeline for a model presents significant challenges, yet segmenting and modularizing this pipeline is even more complex. A standard machine or deep learning pipeline usually starts with a sequence of preprocessing activities, then progresses through a phase of experimentation, model training and optimization, and finally does the deployment. Each stage poses distinct obstacles throughout the model development process.
```

== Elyra

> Elyra provides a Pipeline Visual Editor for building AI pipelines from Jupyter notebooks, Python scripts and R scripts, simplifying the conversion of multiple notebooks or scripts files into batch jobs or workflows.

Reviewer 2: This can be a nice place to mention the recommendation of using scripts instead of notebooks. @mamurak can maybe provide more details about the reasons why this is recommended.

```suggestion
Elyra provides a Pipeline Visual Editor for building AI pipelines from Jupyter notebooks, Python scripts and R scripts, simplifying the conversion of multiple notebooks or scripts files into batch jobs or workflows.

[NOTE]
====
OpenShift AI recommends the use of scripts over notebooks when building pipelines.
====
```

Elyra extends the Jupyter Notebook UI to allow for execution of a notebook as a batch job in local or remote cloud environments. This feature leverages the AI pipelines feature and requires either a Kubeflow Pipelines or Apache Airflow deployment via a runtime configuration.

image::elyra_jupyter.png[Jupyter with elyra]

> Elyra supports two types of components: generic components and custom components. A pipeline that utilizes only generic components is called a generic pipeline, whereas a pipeline that utilizes generic components and/or custom components is referred to as runtime-specific pipeline.

Reviewer 2: What are generic and custom components? Can you briefly define these two concepts? The explanations do not have to be too deep. You can use a definition list to define each term with one or two sentences. For example:

```suggestion
Elyra supports two types of components: generic components and custom components.

Generic components::
A generic component is...

Custom components::
A custom component is...
 
A pipeline that utilizes only generic components is called a generic pipeline, whereas a pipeline that utilizes generic components and/or custom components is referred to as runtime-specific pipeline.
```

> The Elyra Visual Pipeline editor lets you assemble pipelines by dragging and dropping supported files onto the canvas and defining their dependencies. After you've assembled the pipeline and are ready to run it, the editor takes care of generating the Apache Airflow DAG code on the fly, eliminating the need for any coding.

Reviewer 2: Not 100% sure about this, but if we use KFP and Tekton instead of Airflow, then Elyra creates the Tekton OpenShift Pipelines resources, right? If that's the case, mention that case in this paragraph, as follows:

```suggestion
The Elyra Visual Pipeline editor lets you assemble pipelines by dragging and dropping supported files onto the canvas and defining their dependencies. After you've assembled the pipeline and are ready to run it, the editor takes care of generating the Apache Airflow DAG code or the Tekton resources on the fly, eliminating the need for any coding.
```

My knowledge here is limited, so in case I am wrong, discard my comment :)

== Creating a Data Science Pipeline with Elyra

> Pipelines are created in Elyra with the Visual Pipeline Editor by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to create Elyra pipelines with the Visual Pipeline Editor:
```

> * Launch JupyterLab with the Elyra extension installed.

Reviewer 2: Mention that most of our notebook images already include the Elyra extension. @mamurak can you confirm?

* Create a new pipeline by clicking on the Elyra pipeline editor icon.
* Add each node to the pipeline by dragging and dropping notebooks or scripts from the file browser onto the pipeline editor canvas.
* Connect the nodes to define the flow of execution.

> * Configure each node by double-clicking on it and setting the appropriate runtime image and file dependencies.

Reviewer 2: Mention other options that are often used:

```suggestion
* Configure each node by double-clicking on it and setting the appropriate runtime image and file dependencies.
You can also inject environment variables, secrets, and define output files.
```

> * Configure each node by double-clicking on it and setting the appropriate runtime image and file dependencies.

Reviewer 2: In my case, double clicking opens the notebook file.

```suggestion
* Configure each node by right-clicking on it, clicking `Open Properties`, and setting the appropriate runtime image and file dependencies.
```

> * Once the pipeline is complete, you can run it locally or submit it to run on Kubeflow Pipelines or Apache Airflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Once the pipeline is complete, you can submit it to the Data Science Pipelines engine.
```

Reviewer: In our distribution of Elyra, Airflow is not available.

> == Creating a runtime configuration

Reviewer: In our Elyra distribution, the runtime is pre-configured for submitting pipelines to Data Science Pipelines. In this introductory course, we can skip runtime configuration instructions and instead refer to the documentation.

To create a runtime configuration:

* Open the Runtimes panel.
* Click + to add a new runtime configuration and choose the desired runtime configuration type, e.g. Kubeflow Pipelines or Apache Airflow.
* Provide a runtime configuration display name, an optional description, and tag the configuration to make it more easily discoverable.
image::Create_runtime_configuration.png
* Enter the Kubeflow Pipelines or Apache Airflow deployment information. Refer to section Kubeflow Pipelines configuration settings (https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/runtime-conf.html#kubeflow-pipelines-configuration-settings) or Apache Airflow configuration settings(https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/runtime-conf.html#apache-airflow-configuration-settings) for details.
* Enter the Cloud Storage connectivity information. Refer to section Cloud Storage settings for details.
* Save the runtime configuration. The new entry is displayed in the list.
* Expand the entry and verify that you can access the Kubeflow Pipelines or Apache Airflow GUI and the Cloud Storage GUI using the displayed links.

> == Pipeline to Predict weather

Reviewer: As discussed, let's use this Elyra pipeline example that is also covered in the KFP section:
https://github.com/mamurak/os-mlops/tree/main/notebooks/fraud-detection-onnx/offline-scoring

The idea could be to provide the basic Python modules and go through creating the Elyra pipeline in the lab.

> == Pipeline to Predict weather

Reviewer 2: Make it clear that this is an exercise:

```suggestion
== Exercise: Pipeline to Predict weather
```

=== Prerequisites
* This pipeline requires Elyra v1.2 or later.

> * Jupyter notebook with Elyra extension installed

Reviewer 2: Indicate the Notebook image that they have to use when creating the workbench

![image](https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/rhods-pipelines/assets/675470/3f38a044-52e8-4378-a89d-4210dd87ae25)

* Kubeflow runtime configuration, runtime image 

> This notebook pipeline uses a weather time series data set extracts, cleanses and analyzes the data file. The data file is subsequently used to predict the weather.

Reviewer 2: Tell them the repository that they have to clone to find the notebooks. You can find an example here: https://redhatquickcourses.github.io/rhods-intro/rhods-intro/1.33/chapter3/section4.html#_specifications

image::weather_pipeline.png[Weather Pipeline]

This pipeline illustrates the following concepts:

* Execute notebooks sequentially. Notebook Part 1 - Data Cleaning runs after notebook load_data completed successfully.

> * Execute notebooks in parallel. Notebooks Part 2 - Data Analysis and Part 3 - Time Series Forecasting run in parallel after notebook Part 1 - Data Cleaning completed successfully.

Reviewer 2: In the provided pipeline, each task executes sequentially (part 3 executes after part 2).

> * Pass input parameters to a notebook. The generic load_data notebook requires an environment variable to be defined that identifies the public dataset download URL.

Reviewer 2: where is this notebook?

* Share data between notebooks. Notebook Part 1 - Data Cleaning generates a data file jfk_weather_cleaned.csv, which is consumed in notebook Part 2 - Data Analysis and Part 3 - Time Series Forecasting.

The pipeline, dataset, each of these python scripts can be found under /modules/pages.

Run the pipeline using the run pipeline button on top of the pipeline editor notebook
image::run_pipeline.png[Run Pipeline]

> 

Reviewer 2: One thing that I noticed, not only with this pipeline, but with other experiments, is that while debugging a pipeline and running it several times, you have to change the pipeline name after clicking the Run button, in order to pick up the latest config changes of the pipeline.

![image](https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/rhods-pipelines/assets/675470/44609ae4-1119-4979-9f35-0d6c01dee39b)

If you repeatedly run the same pipeline with the same "Pipeline Name", the pipeline configuration is not applied, and the Tekton resource keeps using the original settings. @mamurak did this happen to you?
